About
================================================================================
pbdPAPI is an R package which offers a set of R bindings for the Performance
Application Programming Interface (PAPI).  PAPI is a high-level C library for 
gathering information from hardware performance counters.  PAPI measures events 
like cache misses, flops, etc.

This allows for very powerful profiling of R code (compiled code via, for 
example, Rcpp, or even just plain old vanilla R), but with a very simple
interface.

For more information about PAPI, see the official website: 
http://icl.cs.utk.edu/PAPI/



Installation
================================================================================
pbdPROF requires R version 2.14.0 or higher.  It also requires the PAPI library,
but a distribution of PAPI v 5.3.0 is bundled with the package for those who
do not already have a system installation available.  For configuration options,
and installation instructions, see the package vignette.

The package is distributed on CRAN, but we can not distribute binaries for 
Windows and Mac, as the installation of PAPI is hardware dependent.  As such,
you must build it yourself.  

Before beginning, you may need to install some extra software to be able to 
build packages on your platform.  For Windows, this means installing Rtools: 
http://cran.r-Ë™project.org/bin/windows/base/
For Mac, this means installing Xcode Development Tools 2.4.0 (or higher) from 
Apple.  



Notes
================================================================================
Those with Intel Sandy Bridge and/or Intel Ivy Bridge architecutres should be 
aware that flops counts are unreliable on these platforms.  This is a problem 
with the hardware returning incorrect values, not with PAPI or pbdPAPI.  For 
more details, see: 
http://icl.cs.utk.edu/projects/papi/wiki/PAPITopics:SandyFlops

pbdPAPI only supports serial applications.  For parallel codes, see pbdPROF, and
or consider using PAPI/TAU directly in your compiled code.  For more details, 
see:  http://icl.cs.utk.edu/projects/papi/wiki/Threads





Software license and disclaimer
================================================================================
This package has no official affiliation with the PAPI project.

This software is licensed under the permissive 2-clause BSD license. You can 
find a quick summary of the license here:

https://tldrlegal.com/license/bsd-2-clause-license-%28freebsd%29

The full terms of the license (it's very short) are contained in the LICENSE 
file in the root directory of the project.

